\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gadgetviewer.info
@settitle Gadget File Viewer 1.0.3
@c %**end of header
     
@copying
Manual for Gadget File Viewer version 1.0.3
@end copying
     
@titlepage
@title Gadget File Viewer Manual
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
     
@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents
     
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Gadget File Viewer
     
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex
     
@menu
* Introduction::           Summary of features
* Compilation::            How to compile the code
* Reading simulation data::      What types of simulation data can be read in
* Navigation controls::    How to move around the simulation
* The displayed sample::   How the number of particles displayed is determined               
* Plot types::             Displaying the particles in different ways
* View parameters::        Field of view, type of projection etc.
* Selecting particles::    Follow particles between snapshots
* Making movies::          See the particle distribution rotating or evolving
* Plotting graphs::        Scatter plots and histograms of particle properties
* Saved settings::         Save and restore the state of the program
* Saving images::          Write out a PNG image of the particle distribution
@end menu




@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction




 
@node Compilation
@chapter Compilation

@menu
* The configure script::
* Dependencies::
* Specifying compilers and flags::
* Specifying library locations::
@end menu

@node The configure script
@section The configure script

This package uses a configure script generated using GNU
Autoconf. You can get a summary of the available options by running
@*
@example
./configure --help
@end example
@*
In the unlikely event that all of the dependencies are installed in
standard locations and you don't need any special compiler flags, you
might get away with just doing
@*
@example
./configure --prefix=<path>
make
make install
@end example
@*
where @code{<path>} is the directory where the program should be installed.

@node Dependencies
@section Dependencies

In order to compile the program you need at least a C compiler, a
Fortran 90 compiler, and the GTK+ 2.0 GUI library. The program also has
several optional dependencies:

@itemize @bullet
@item HDF5  : allows reading of HDF5 snapshots. The HDF5 Fortran interface is not required.
@item libpng: required for writing out movie frames and screenshots
@item PlPlot or Cairo: to make scatterplots and histograms of particle properties. Cairo is now used by GTK so PLPlot is only necessary if you have a very old version of GTK.
@end itemize

If any of these are missing, some features will be unavailable. The
configure script generates a warning for each library which can't be found.

@node Specifying compilers and flags
@section Specifying compilers and flags

The compilers to use can be specified by setting the following
environment variables before running the configure script:

@itemize @bullet
@item
CC      - sets the C compiler
@item
CFLAGS  - sets C compiler flags to use (e.g. optimization)
@item
FC      - sets the Fortran 90 compiler
@item
FCFLAGS - sets Fortran compiler flags to use (e.g. optimization or module file locations)
@end itemize

@node Specifying library locations
@section Specifying library locations

If libraries are installed in non-standard locations (i.e. not
somewhere like /usr/lib), the following parameters can be used to tell
configure where to find the libraries:
@*
@example
    --with-hdf5=...           - specify path to HDF5
    --with-plplot=...         - specify path to PlPlot
    --with-png=...            - specify path to libpng
@end example
@*
The supplied directory should contain the 'include' and 'lib'
subdirectories for the corresponding library. E.g. if libhdf5.so is
in /opt/local/hdf5/current/lib/ then you would use
@*
@example
./configure --with-hdf5=/opt/local/hdf5/current/
@end example
@*
The program can be compiled without a particular library by doing
something like:
@*
@example
./configure --without-hdf5
@end example
@*
If you're having problems linking a library you can use the LIBS and
LDFLAGS environment variables to pass extra flags to the linker.




@node Reading simulation data
@chapter Reading simulation data

@menu
* Reading snapshots::
* Reading group catalogues::
* Reading additional arrays::
@end menu

@node Reading snapshots
@section Reading snapshots

Snapshot files can be read in either by specifying the name of one
file at the command line or using the ``Read Gadget snapshot''
option in the File menu. In either case, all files in the snapshot
are read.

All three formats described in the documentation for the public
version of Gadget-2 can be read.

@subsection Gadget type 1 binary

Type 1 binary snapshots consist of a header followed by a series of
Fortran records containing the particle data. Since these files
contain very little metadata only the following quantities can be
read in:
@itemize @bullet
@item Positions
@item Velocities
@item Masses
@item Particle IDs
@item Internal energy of gas particles
@item Density of gas particles
@end itemize

The precision and endian-ness of the data is determined automatically
from the Fortran record markers.

@subsection Gadget type 2 binary

Type 2 binary snapshots include a four character ``TAG'' before each
data block. By default the following blocks are recognised:

@itemize @bullet
@item POS
@item VEL
@item MASS
@item ID
@item U
@item RHO
@end itemize

Additional blocks can be read in by adding them to the configuration
file:
@*
@example
~/.gadgetviewer_settings/gadget_binary_type2_blocks
@end example
@*
Note that only scalar quantities can be read in this way. If the 
configuration file does not exist a default file is created when the 
program is run.

@subsection Gadget HDF5 snapshots

Any dataset in the PartTypeX groups of a HDF5 snapshot can be read as
long as it has one element per particle and is of a floating point or
integer type. By default the following datasets are read:
@itemize @bullet
@item Coordinates
@item Velocity/Velocities
@item Mass/Masses
@item ParticleIDs
@item InternalEnergy
@item Density
@end itemize
Additional datasets can be read in by editing the configuration file:
@*
@example
~/.gadgetviewer_settings/gadget_binary_type2_blocks
@end example
@*
If this file does not exist a default file is created when the 
program is run.

@node Reading group catalogues
@section Reading group catalogues

FoF and SubFind group catalogues can be read by selecting the 
``Auxiliary data/Read groups'' option in the File menu and choosing
one file from the set. The name of this file is used as a template
to locate the other files.

Once a  group catalogue has been read the particles will have additional 
integer properties named ``FoFGroupIndex'' and/or ``SubGroupIndex''.
These specify which FoF and/or SubFind group each particle belongs to.

@subsection L-Gadget FoF groups

These consist of group_tab and group_ids files and contain FoF groups only.

@subsection L-SubFind subfind groups

These consist of sub_tab and sub_ids files and contain SubFind groups only.

@subsection P-Gadget3 FoF and SubFind

These consist of subhalo_tab and subhalo_ids files and contain both 
FoF and SubFind groups.

@node Reading additional arrays
@section Reading additional arrays

Its possible to read in extra particle properties from ascii or HDF5
files using the "Read additional data" option in the file menu. These
files must follow the same naming convention as Gadget snapshots. Each
data array can be split across any number of files as long as there is
one element for each particle in the snapshot and the values are stored
in the same order as in the snapshot.

Once an extra property has been read the program will look for a
corresponding set of files whenever a new snapshot is loaded. This is
done by replacing any instances of the snapshot number in the
filename(s).




@node Navigation controls
@chapter Navigation controls

@menu
* Mouse controls::
* Keyboard shortcuts::
* The selected point::
@end menu

@node Mouse controls
@section Mouse controls

The default mouse controls are as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item Rotate the view by dragging the left mouse button in the main window
@item Zoom in or out by dragging the right mouse button up or down or using the scroll wheel
@item Centre on a clump of particles by clicking on it with the middle button
@item Move the view in the plane of the screen by dragging with the middle button
@end itemize

These controls can be changed using the ``Customise'' option in the ``Controls'' menu.

@node Keyboard shortcuts
@section Keyboard shortcuts

Most of the menu items have keyboard shortcuts. The key combinations are
displayed next to the corresponding menu items. Where buttons in the main
window have an underlined letter the button can be activated by pressing 
Alt and that letter.




@node The selected point
@section The selected point

The currently selected point is highlighted with a cross and its coordinates
are displayed at the bottom of the main window. If the view is
rotated this point is used as the centre of rotation.

You can view the average properties of the particles closest to the selected
point using the ``Show info'' button at the top of the main window. This
locates the N nearest neighbours (N=10 by default) and calculates the 
mean of each particle property over those neighbours.

You can move the selected point to specific coordinates using
``Jump to coordinates'' in the ``Options'' menu.




@node The displayed sample
@chapter The displayed sample

Since it is quite easy to read in more particles than can be plotted while
maintaining a reasonable frame rate, the program usually displays a random
sample of the particles. By default up to 250,000 are shown.
When a snapshot is first loaded, if there are more than 250,000 particles
a random sample is taken from the full simulation volume.

The maximum number of particles to show can be changed with the
``View parameters'' option in the ``View'' menu.

@menu
* Viewing a sub-region in more detail::
* Viewing the whole volume::
@end menu

@node Viewing a sub-region in more detail
@section Viewing a sub-region in more detail

If you zoom in on a particular region of the simulation you can make it draw
a random sample of particles from just that region by clicking the resample 
button in the main window. Alternatively you can activate the automatic resampling
option in the View menu. This resamples the particles whenever the zoom factor changes
by some amount. Its best not to use this in conjunction with the smoothed density
plot because the smoothing lengths are recalculated whenever the particles are
resampled.

The current sampling rate is displayed at the bottom of the main window. If
you zoom in far enough it will reach 100% and all particles will be visible.

@node Viewing the whole volume
@section Viewing the whole volume

The ``Show all'' button at the top of the main window draws a new sample from
the full simulation volume. Use this if you've zoomed in and resampled and now
wish to return to viewing the whole volume. Alternatively, you can just zoom
right out and click the Resample button.




@node Plot types
@chapter Plot types

@menu
* Dotplots::
* Projected density plot::
* Colour by particle property::
* Smoothed projected density::
* Smoothed particle property plot::
@end menu

@node Dotplots
@section Dotplots

@node Projected density plot
@section Projected density plot

@node Colour by particle property
@section Colour by particle property

@node Smoothed projected density
@section Smoothed projected density

@node Smoothed particle property plot
@section Smoothed particle property plot




@node View parameters
@chapter View parameters




@node Selecting particles
@chapter Selecting particles

"Select particles" under the Options menu allows you to highlight
particles according to property values and/or their distance from the
selected point. It uses the IDs from the snapshot file to identify
particles, so if you have a simulation where the IDs are not unique you
may get strange results. For example, any particle with the same ID as
a selected particle will be selected too. Particles stay selected when
you change snapshots, so you can use this to identify progenitors of a
particular halo, for example.

It is possible to select up to six different sets of particles
simultaneously. The drop down box at the top of the "Select particles"
window allows you to specify which set to operate on, and you can
specify a name and a colour for each one. The chosen colour is used to
highlight the selected particles in the main display and in the graph
window.




@node Making movies
@chapter Making movies

Select "Make movie" from the options menu. "Rotating movie" makes a
movie of the particle distribution rotating about the selected
point. "Evolving movie" loops over a range of snapshots and makes one
frame per snapshot, optionally re-centering the view on the selected
particles before calculating each frame. It writes out the frames as
png files so you need to use something like mencoder to encode the movie.

Evolving movies will look best if you ensure that the sampling rate is
100% before making the movie. Otherwise you get a lot of flickering
because it uses a different random sample for each frame.




@node Plotting graphs
@chapter Plotting graphs

"Make plot" in the options menu allows you to plot a histogram of the
values of a particle property or to make a scatterplot of one property
against another (e.g. temperature vs density). Particles in the current
sample are shown in red and each set of selected particles is shown in
the appropriate colour for that set. The plot will update automatically
if you choose a different sample, change snapshots or modify a
selection.

If the property plotted on the x or y axis cannot be loaded for the
current snapshot the graph window will be blank.




@node Saved settings
@chapter Saved settings




@node Saving images
@chapter Saving images


@bye
